README.md, before:

<img src="https://github.com/greenelab/ponyo/blob/master/logo.png" width=150 align=right> 

# ponyo 
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/greenelab/ponyo/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/github/greenelab/ponyo?branch=master)

**Alexandra Lee and Casey Greene 2020**

**University of Pennsylvania**

This repository is named after the the character [Ponyo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ponyo), from Hayao Miyazaki's animated film *Ponyo*, as she uses her magic to simulate a human appearance after getting a sample of human blood. 
The method simulates a compendia of new gene expression data based on existing gene expression data to learn a representation of gene expression patterns.

## Installation

This package can be installed using pip:

```
pip install ponyo
```

## How to use
Example notebooks using ponyo on test data can be found in [human_tests](https://github.com/greenelab/ponyo/tree/master/human_tests)

Additionally, this method has been used in [simulate-expression-compendia](https://github.com/greenelab/simulate-expression-compendia) and [generic-expression-patterns](https://github.com/greenelab/generic-expression-patterns) repositories.

## Setting random seeds
To keep the VAE training deterministic, you will need to set multiple random seeds:
1. numpy random
2. python random
3. tensorflow random

For an example of this, see [human_tests](https://github.com/greenelab/ponyo/tree/master/human_tests)

## Configuration file

The tables lists the core parameters required to generate simulated data using modules from [ponyo](https://github.com/greenelab/ponyo). Those marked with * indicate those parameters that will vary depending on the type of approach .

| Name | Description |
| :--- | :---------- |
| local_dir| str: Parent directory on local machine to store intermediate results|
| dataset_name| str: Name for analysis directory containing notebooks using ponyo|
| raw_data_filename| str: File storing raw gene expression data|
| normalized_data_filename| str: File storing normalized gene expression data|
| metadata_filename*| str: File containing metadata associated with data|
| experiment_ids_filename*| str: File containing list of experiment ids that have gene expression data available|
| scaler_transform_filename| str: File to store mapping from normalized to raw gene expression range|
| simulation_type | str: Name of simulation approach directory to store results locally|
| NN_architecture | str: Name of neural network architecture to use. Format 'NN_<intermediate layer>_<latent layer>'|
| learning_rate| float: Step size used for gradient descent. In other words, it's how quickly the  methods is learning|
| batch_size | str: Training is performed in batches. So this determines the number of samples to consider at a given time|
| epochs | int: Number of times to train over the entire input dataset|
| kappa | float: How fast to linearly ramp up KL loss|
| intermediate_dim| int: Size of the hidden layer|
| latent_dim | int: Size of the bottleneck layer|
| epsilon_std | float: Standard deviation of Normal distribution to sample latent space|
| validation_frac | float: Fraction of input samples to use to validate for VAE training|
| num_simulated_samples* | int: If using random sampling approach, simulate a compendia with these many samples|
| num_simulated_experiments*| int: If using latent-transformation approach, simulate a compendia with these many experiments|
| num_simulated*| int: If using template-based approach, simulate these many experiments|
| metadata_delimiter*| str: Delimiter to parse metadata file|
| metadata_experiment_colname* | str: Column header that contains experiment id that maps expression data and metadata|
| metadata_sample_colname* | str: Column header that contains sample id that maps expression data and metadata|
| project_id*| int: If using template-based approach, experiment id to use as template experiment|

Commit message:

add more details to readme on simulations and how to run them

README.md, after:

<img src="https://github.com/greenelab/ponyo/blob/master/logo.png" width=150 align=right> 

# ponyo 
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/greenelab/ponyo/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/github/greenelab/ponyo?branch=master)

**Alexandra J. Lee, Ben Heil and Casey S. Greene 2020**

**University of Pennsylvania**

This repository is named after the the character [Ponyo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ponyo), from Hayao Miyazaki's animated film *Ponyo*, as she uses her magic to simulate a human appearance after getting a sample of human blood. 
The method simulates new gene expression data by training a generative neural network on existing gene expression data to learn a representation of gene expression patterns.

## Installation

This package can be installed using pip:

```
pip install ponyo
```

## Types of simulations
There are 3 types of simulations that ponyo allows:

| Name | Description |
| :--- | :---------- |
| Simulation by random sampling| This approach simulates gene expression data by randomly sampling from the latent space distribution. The function to run this apprach is divided into 2 components: `simulate_by_random_sampling` is a wrapper which loads VAE trained models from directory `<root>/<analysis name>/"models"/<NN_architecture>` and `run_sample_simulation` which runs the simulation. Note: `simulate_by_random_sampling` assumes the files are organized as described above. If this directory organization doesn't apply to you, then you can directly use `run_sample_simulation` by passing in the trained VAE models. An example of how to use this can be found [here](https://github.com/greenelab/ponyo/blob/master/human_tests/Human_random_sampling_simulation.ipynb). |
| Simulation by latent transformation| This approach simulates gene expression data by encoding experiments into the latent space and then shifting samples from that experiment in the latent space. Unlike the "Simulation by random sampling" approach, this method accounts for experiment level information by shifting samples from the same experiment together. The function to run this apprach is divided into 2 components: `simulate_by_latent_transformation` is a wrapper which loads VAE trained models from directory `<root>/<analysis name>/"models"/<NN_architecture>` and `run_latent_transformation_simulation` which runs the simulation. Note: `simulate_by_latent_transformation` assumes the files are organized as described above. If this directory organization doesn't apply to you, then you can directly use `run_latent_transformation_simulation` by passing in the trained VAE models. 

There are 2 flavors of this approach: `simulate_by_latent_transform` inputs a dataset with multiple experiments (these are your template experiments) and then it outputs the same number of new simulated experiments that are created by shifting each of those input template experiments. An example of how to use this can be found [here](https://github.com/greenelab/ponyo/blob/master/human_tests/Human_latent_transform_simulation.ipynb). The second flavor is `shift_template_experiment` which inputs a single template experiment and can output multiple simulated experiments based on that one template by shifting that template experiment to different locations in the latent space. An example for how to use this can be found [here](https://github.com/greenelab/ponyo/blob/master/human_tests/Human_template_simulation.ipynb).|


## How to use
Example notebooks using ponyo on test data can be found in [human_tests](https://github.com/greenelab/ponyo/tree/master/human_tests)

Additionally, this method has been used in [simulate-expression-compendia](https://github.com/greenelab/simulate-expression-compendia) and [generic-expression-patterns](https://github.com/greenelab/generic-expression-patterns) repositories.

## Setting random seeds
To keep the VAE training deterministic, you will need to set multiple random seeds:
1. numpy random
2. python random
3. tensorflow random

For an example of this, see [human_tests](https://github.com/greenelab/ponyo/tree/master/human_tests)

## Configuration file

The tables lists the core parameters required to generate simulated data using modules from [ponyo](https://github.com/greenelab/ponyo). Those marked with * indicate those parameters that will vary depending on the type of approach .

| Name | Description |
| :--- | :---------- |
| local_dir| str: Parent directory on local machine to store intermediate results|
| dataset_name| str: Name for analysis directory containing notebooks using ponyo|
| raw_data_filename| str: File storing raw gene expression data|
| normalized_data_filename| str: File storing normalized gene expression data. This file is generated by `normalize_expression_data()`.|
| metadata_filename*| str: File containing metadata associated with data|
| experiment_ids_filename*| str: File containing list of experiment ids that have gene expression data available|
| scaler_transform_filename| str: Python pickle file to store mapping from normalized to raw gene expression range. This file is generated by `normalize_expression_data()`.|
| simulation_type | str: Name of simulation approach directory to store results locally|
| NN_architecture | str: Name of neural network architecture to use. Format 'NN_<intermediate layer>_<latent layer>'|
| learning_rate| float: Step size used for gradient descent. In other words, it's how quickly the  methods is learning|
| batch_size | str: Training is performed in batches. So this determines the number of samples to consider at a given time|
| epochs | int: Number of times to train over the entire input dataset|
| kappa | float: How fast to linearly ramp up KL loss|
| intermediate_dim| int: Size of the hidden layer|
| latent_dim | int: Size of the bottleneck layer|
| epsilon_std | float: Standard deviation of Normal distribution to sample latent space|
| validation_frac | float: Fraction of input samples to use to validate for VAE training|
| num_simulated_samples* | int: If using random sampling approach, simulate a compendia with these many samples|
| num_simulated_experiments*| int: If using latent-transformation approach, simulate a compendia with these many experiments|
| num_simulated*| int: If using template-based approach, simulate these many experiments|
| metadata_delimiter*| str: Delimiter to parse metadata file|
| metadata_experiment_colname* | str: Column header that contains experiment id that maps expression data and metadata|
| metadata_sample_colname* | str: Column header that contains sample id that maps expression data and metadata|
| project_id*| int: If using template-based approach, experiment id to use as template experiment|

For guidance on setting VAE training prameters, see configurations used in [simulate-expression-compendia](https://github.com/greenelab/simulate-expression-compendia/configs) and [generic-expression-patterns](https://github.com/greenelab/generic-expression-patterns/configs) repositories


## Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Marvin Thielk for adding coverage to tests.
